The third manUK. 1948-1949/1949. Melodrama de suspense.London Film Productions Ltd. – [British Lion Production Assets Limited]. © MCMXLIX [1949] London Film Productions Ltd. B/N, 35 mm. Sonido: Western Electric Recording. 104 minutos, 9.428 pies. Rodaje: 22 Oct 1948 – 11 Dic 1948 en Viena (Austria); terminada en los estudios Shepperton en Mar 1949. Censura: 20 Ago 1949; 107 minutos, 41 segundos, 9.692 pies; certificado: A. Distribución:  British Lion Film Corporation Ltd. Estreno en Londres: 31 Ago 1949. EE.UU.: © London Film Productions, Ltd.; 31 Ago 1949; LP2580. PCA no. 14125. Distribución: Selznick Releasing Organization. Estreno en Nueva York: 2 Feb 1950. 93 minutos. España: El tercer hombre.?Directed by Carol Reed. [Producers]: Alexander Korda, David O. Selznick present Carol Reed's productio of “The third man”. Associate producer: Hugh Perceval. By [=original story and screenplay]: Graham Greene. Photographed by Robert Krasker. Additional photography: John Wilcox, Stan Pavey. Camera operators: E. Scaife, Denys Coop. [Original music: Anton Karas]. Zither music played by Anton Karas. Editor: Oswald Hafenrichter. Assembly cutter: Peter Taylor. Sets designed by Vincent Korda, with John Hawkesworth, Joseph Bato. Assistant art directors: Ferdinand Bellan, James Sawyer. Wardrobe: Ivy Baker. Make-up: George Frost. Hairdressing: J. Shear. Sound supervisor: John Cox. Sound recording: Bert Ross, Red Law. Sound editor: Jack Drake. Austrian advisor: Elizabeth Montagu. Production manager: T. S. Lyndon-Haynes. Assistant director: Guy Hamilton. Continuity: Peggy McClafferty. [In charge of B unit: George Pollock]. [B unit accountant/cashier: R. Reader]. [Production secretary: Teresa Deans]. [B unit production assistant: Robert Dunbar]. [2nd assistant director: Jack Causey]. [3rd assistant director: Jack Green]. [Assistant director – Austria: Gino Wimmer]. [Assistant continuity: Angela Allen]. [B unit camera operator: Monty Berman]. [Focus puller: Geoffrey P. Meldrum]. [B unit focus puller: John von Kotze]. [Clapper loader: Alan McCabe]. [Loader: J. Bicknell]. [Chief floor electrician: H. Mackay]. [Electricians: Bert Whitear, S. Dye, Archie Dansie]. [Camera grip: Joe Vincent]. [Stills: Len Lee]. [Matte painter: W. Percy Day]. [Assistant editor: Derek Armstrong]. [Cutter: Noreen Best]. [Assistants cutter: Ken Behrens, David Eady]. [Extra assistant cutter: Michael Coton]. [Set dresser: Dario Simoni]. [Production buyer: George Durant]. [Chief floor props: Sydney Leggett]. [Floor props: Bobby Murrell, J. Larkin, F. Dann]. [Scenic artist: Peter Mullins]. [Standby carpenter: W. Nichols]. [Standby painter: P. Tindle]. [Standby plasterer: E. Greenleaf]. [Standby rigger: J. Culley]. [Stagehand: A. Southall, H. Turner]. [Wardrobe master: George Murray]. [Ladies' assistant wardrobe: Gene Hornsby]. [Men's assistant wardrobe: Dickie Richardson]. [Assistant make-up: Peter Evans]. [Assistants hairdresser: Iris Tilley]. [B unit sound recordist: George Adams]. [Sound camera operator: James Dooley]. [B unit sound camera operator/maintenance: P. Jackson]. [Boom operator: Jack Davies]. [Sound maintenance: Dick Longstaff]. [Assistant sound editor: John Glen]. [Film titles: Ronnie Wass]. [Publicity: Enid Jones]. Produced at London Film Studios, Shepperton, England; [Worton Hall Studios]. [Locations: Vienna, Austria; 8 Schreyvogelgasse, Vienna, Austria (doorway where Harry Lime first appears); Zentral-Friedhof, Simmeringen Hauptstrasse, Vienna, Austria (funeral scenes); Hotel Sacher, Philharmonikerstrasse 4, Vienna, Austria (Holly Martins' hotel); Morzinplatz, Vienna, Austria (Kurtz's house); Neuer Markt, Vienna, Austria (as Cafe Mozart); Palais Pallavicini, Josephsplatz 5, Vienna, Austria (Harry Lime's apartment); Reichsbrücke, Vienna, Austria (suspension bridge); Riesenrad, Prater, Vienna, Austria (ferris wheel); Isleworth, Middlesex, England].?Intérpretes: Joseph Cotten (Holly Martins), [Alida] Valli (Anna [Schmidt)], Orson Welles (Harry Lime), Trevor Howard (major Calloway),  Bernard Lee (sergeant Paine), Paul Hoerbiger [=Hörbiger] ([Karl], Harry's porter), Ernst Deutsch (“Baron” Kurtz), Siegfried Breuer (Popescu), Erich Ponto (Dr. Winkel), Wilfrid Hyde-White (Crabbin), Hedwig Bleibtreu (Anna's old landlady]), [Reed De Rouen (American MP at railway station)], [Eric Pohlmann (Schmolka bartender)], [Paul Hardtmuth (Hartman, hall porter at Sacher's)], [Annie Rosar (Karl's wife)], [Herbert Halbik (“Little” Hansl, boy with ball)], [Jenny Werner (Hilde, Winkel's maid)], [Alexis Chesnakov (colonel Brodsky, Russian liaison officer)], [Frederick Schreicker (Hansl's father)], [Thomas Gallagher (taxi driver)], [Martin Boddey (Russian military police)], [Geoffrey Keen (British military police)], [Lilly Kahn (nurse)], [Leo Bieber (barman at Casanova Club)], [Nelly Arno (Kurtz's mother)], [Anthony Higginson (page)], [Geoffrey Wade (under porter)], [Walter Hertner (barman at Sacher's)], [Martin Miller (head waiter)], [Rona Grahame, Holga Walrow, Hannah Norbert (actresses at Josefstadt Theatre)], [Karel Stepanek (actor at Josefstadt Theater)], [Harry Belcher, Michael Connor (men chasing Holly)], [Jack Arrow, Reg Morris, Stephen Gray, Duncan Ryder (international patrol A)], [Brooks Kyle, Ray Browne, Arthur Hall, Howard Leighton (international patrol B)], [Gordon Tanner, Michael Godfrey, Guy de Monceau, Arthur Barrett (international patrol C)], [Paul Carpenter, Vernon Greeves (international patrol D)], [Hugo Schuster (waiter)], [Charles Irwin (colonel O'Sullivan)], [Robert Brown (military policeman in sewer chase)], [Harold Ayer (soldier)], [Paul Birch (military policeman)], [Jack Faint, Madge Brindley (guests at Casanova bar)], [Marie-Louise Charlier (stripper at club)], [Brother Theodore (man on street)], [Ernst Ulman (visitor at literature club)], [Peter Fontaine], [Guy Hamilton (double for Orson Welles in sewer chase)]. [Narradores del prólogo: Carol Reed (UK version), Joseph Cotten (US version)].?[Soundtrack: “The third man theme” (1949), music by Anton Karas, performed by Anton Karas on a zither; “Managua, Nicaragua” (1946), music by Irving Fields, lyrics by Albert Gamse; “Das Alte Lied” (1931), music by Henry Love, lyrics by Fritz Löhner-Beda].??Notes: The American version of the film opens with a voice-over narration in which the character "Holly Martins" explains that post-war Vienna is divided into four zones: American, British, Russian and French. He adds that the center of the city is international and is policed by a security force comprising one member from each of the four powers. In the British version of the film, the opening voice-over is delivered by a British narrator, whom modern sources identify as producer-director Carol Reed. In Graham Greene's novella, which was published after the film's release, the three male protagonists were British. In his preface to the novella, Greene maintains that the story was never intended for publication, but was written expressly as a blueprint for the screenplay. "To me it is almost impossible to write a film without first writing a story," he wrote. "One must have the sense of more material than one needs to draw on." Greene adds that Welles wrote the well-known line about Switzerland's sole contribution to world culture being the cuckoo clock. Some modern sources also credit Welles with the famous shot in which "Harry Lime" is suddenly revealed in a shaft of light, but this scene is as it appears in the novella. According to modern scholars, Greene based the character of Lime on British double agent Kim Philby, who was Greene's superior in Britain's Secret Intelligence Service. Greene's biographers suggest that his suspicion of Philby was the reason for Greene's abrupt resignation from the service in 1944. Cary Grant was originally cast as Holly, and modern sources report that Noël Coward was sought to portray Lime. When these two characters were rewritten as Americans, co-producer David O. Selznick expressed interest in Robert Mitchum, whose popularity had soared in the wake of his arrest for possession of marijuana, for the role of Lime. In a memo reprinted in a modern source, Selznick wrote that Mitchum would guarantee strong box office returns, as opposed to Orson Welles, "who in my opinion would not add a dollar to gross." Mitchum was sentenced to jail, however, and Welles, desperate for money to fund his production of Othello, finally agreed to play what has become one of the most memorable roles of his career. Modern sources add that Carol Reed wanted James Stewart for the role of Holly, but producer David O. Selznick insisted on Joseph Cotten, who was under contract to Selznick's production company at that time. The Third Man was filmed on location in Vienna, Austria. A 24 Aug 1948 news item in Var notes that Reed was granted permission to film by all four of the country's occupying powers. The British version of the film is approximately eleven minutes longer than the American version, which was re-edited by Selznick. In a memo to the press contained in the film's production file at the AMPAS Library, Selznick Releasing Organization asked reviewers to "refrain from divulging the climax of the film story, i.e., that Harry Lime is alive." Most critics revealed this plot point anyway. According to a 20 Sep 1950 news item in Var, twenty-five thousand East Germans attended a screening of the film in an open-air cinema in West Berlin, in defiance of East Germany's Communist government. The Third Man won the Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Black and White), and was nominated for Best Director and Best Film Editing. The film was named Best Film at the 1949 Cannes Film Festitval. The Third Man also won considerable praise for Anton Karas' score, which is played on a zither throughout the film. According to an article in Newsweek, a recording of Karas' music from the film was a best-seller in England. A radio adaptation of the film was broadcast on Lux Radio Theatre on 9 Apr 1951, with Joseph Cotten, Ted de Corsia, Ben Wright and Evelyn Keyes, and on 8 Feb 1954, with Ray Milland, Ruth Roman, de Corsia and Wright. In 1952, the BBC produced a syndicated radio program, The Third Man, which was also called The Lives of Harry Lime and Harry Lime Adventures. Orson Welles supplied the voice of Lime in the series, which also featured Karas' "The Third Man Theme." In 1959, BBC-TV and Twentieth Century-Fox co-produced a syndicated television series, The Third Man, which was filmed both in England and Hollywood. The series, which Var called "the first of the truly Anglo-American co-production undertakings," starred Michael Rennie as Lime—who was changed from a ruthless black marketeer to a dashing soldier-of-fortune—and co-starred Jonathan Harris. The television series ran in the United States from 1960-61. Orson Welles evaded production assistants and assistant director Guy Hamilton while traveling in Europe when he was supposed to be on location filming in Vienna. During Welles' unexpected absence, Carol Reed had to film around him, getting numerous spectacular shots in the sewers seen in the finished film. Numerous body doubles for Welles were used, included Hamilton, who was made to wear an over-sized hat and padded coat to approximate Welles' larger size. Reed himself doubled for Welles' hands when they reach through the sewer grate. When Welles finally arrived, he was 2 weeks late. Once he finally arrived in Vienna, Orson Welles refused to film various scenes in the sewers. Due to his protests, various sets replicating the Vienna sewers had to be constructed by Alexander Korda on sound-stages back in England. The Vienna Police Dept. has a special unit that is assigned solely to patrol the city's intricate sewer system, as its network of interlocking tunnels make great hiding places for criminals on the run from the law, stolen property, drugs, etc. The "actors" playing police officers in the film were actually off-duty members of that unit. Rumors have long since been widespread that Orson Welles wrote all of Harry Lime's dialogue and even that he took over the direction of his own scenes. Everyone involved, including Welles himself, have always insisted that the film was directed by only Carol Reed. Welles did claim that he wrote most of Lime's dialogue, which is also a fabrication. The extent of Welles' contributions were Lime's grumbling about his stomach problems (which were improvisations) and the famous "cuckoo clock" spiel at the end of the ferris wheel scene. Somewhat apocryphal stories abound regarding Carol Reed discovering musician Anton Karas while scouring Vienna bars and nightclubs. Reed actually heard Karas playing at a production party and insisted the Austrian zither player come to Reed's hotel room and record songs to use for the contract. Later in production, Reed realized he wanted to use Karas' music for the whole film and flew Karas out to London to record the score. Karas became a top-selling musician thanks to the film and opened a nightclub called "The Third Man" in Vienna, which he ran to the end of his days. During meetings between Graham Greene and Carol Reed with David O. Selznick, Greene was less than impressed with Selznick, who had (according to Selznick's own son) "become something of a parody of himself". Greene later mocked Selznick's dependency, at that stage, on the drug Dexedrine, better known as "speed". Coincidentally, Reed also became hooked on Dexedrine while shooting the time-consuming film. Both Reed and Selznick were operating on as little as 2 hours of sleep a day. Carol Reed had three separate film units working most days of production: a daytime unit, a nighttime unit and a sewer unit. Reed insisted upon directing each unit, resulting in him working 20 hour days. David O. Selznick insisted the filmmakers use Alida Valli for the female lead. Actually, Carol Reed and Alexander Korda were happy with the choice. Selznick became dissatisfied that Reed had Valli wear more plain clothes, wanting her to look glamorous and beautiful throughout. Reed won out on this aspect, due to the support of Korda. Bernard Lee was second choice for Sgt. Paine. The actor who was first choice was not hired because of billing issues. The tunnels featured in this film are part of the Wienkanal, which channels the Wien River through central Vienna out to the Danube River. The main tunnel is the huge arched structure through which the river flows a distance of about 1.6km. The gated side passages are connections to a wet weather sewer overflow, and the chamber with the balconies is the overflow point. The spiral staircase is one of 6 exits from the main culvert. Tours are run through the system on a daily basis. Events are occasionally held down the tunnels in commemoration of the film and its characters. Orson Welles said that when he agreed to play Harry Lime, he was offered either a straight salary or a percentage of the profits. Welles chose the salary but he later regretted it because the film went on to become such a huge hit, the percentage was ultimately worth far more than the salary. Although David O. Selznick theoretically produced, the rest of the crew hated him and his ideas (he suggested once to Graham Greene that the film be called "Night Time in Vienna"). In one shot in the Wienkanal, a security officer passes by a wall with the engraving "O5," which was the secret symbol of the Austrian resistance against Nazi occupation. ("O5" represents "OE" or "Ö," the first letter of "Österreich," the native name for Austria.) The future director John Glen was working in the editing department at Shepperton Studios when the film started production. He had a similar build to Joseph Cotten and was enlisted to supply the sound of his footsteps in post-production sound dubbing. He watched a continuous loop in the Westrex theatre and memorized the exact speed of Cotten's pace before dashing outside to a stairwell with a hard surface where the sound of his walking was recorded. The original script included a return appearance by Charters and Caldicott, the two English cricket enthusiasts who first appeared in Alfred Hitchcock's The Lady Vanishes (1938), and later in Carol Reed's Night Train to Munich (1940). However, the two characters were streamlined into the role of Mr. Crabbin, played by Wilfrid Hyde-White. After the failed talk, Holly Martins escapes from the police through an attic room containing a cockatoo (referred to as "a parrot" by Martins). There is a brief shot which includes a painting of a nude seen over Martins' shoulder. The nude's pubic hair can be clearly seen, so this shot's appearance in a major release of the period represents a very rare lapse by film censors. This was meant to be the first of a series of collaborations between mega-producers David O. Selznick and Alexander Korda. However, as the production grew difficult, they decided to take it one film at a time. Ironically, due to the success of the film, since both producers were at each other's throats for the credit for the film, they never collaborated again. By all accounts Carol Reed was a relatively slow director, completing only a few shots or set-ups per day. Time was all-important during the Vienna shooting, however, because the location filming needed to be completed before the late winter snows set in. Carol Reed went to great lengths to capture the atmosphere of the beleaguered city on film, and he was helped along by city officials and ordinary inhabitants. On nights when rain was unavailable to give the cobblestone streets the appropriate glistening sheen, for example, the city would provide a fire brigade to wet things down. Reed also incorporated many local residents into the film as extras such as the often glimpsed balloon seller. The first British production to be largely shot on location. With its preference for real locations and real local people as extras, it's also Britain's first attempt at the neo-realistic style that Italian directors like Luchino Visconti and Roberto Rossellini were making so popular at the time. Paul Hörbiger couldn't speak a word of English and had to learn his lines phonetically. When assistant director Guy Hamilton was negotiating with the owners of the flat which overlooked the square where Orson Welles would be famously hiding in a doorway, he was getting nowhere with them when he told them that the film starred Welles, Joseph Cotten and Alida Valli. It was only when he mentioned in passing that local star Paul Hörbiger was also in the film that they fell over themselves to offer up their apartment. The ending was the subject of contention during production. Surprisingly, Graham Greene, known for his bleak, depressing stories, wanted the film to have a "happy ending", with Holly Martins embracing Anna Schmidt after Lime's funeral; whereas David O. Selznick, known for his love of "Hollywood endings", advocated that Anna should ignore Holly after the funeral. Carol Reed agreed with Selznick and the sad ending was used. Reed, however, felt insecure about the length of the nearly 2-minute shoot he filmed where Martins waits for Anna and she walks by him without acknowledging his presence. The Third Man won the 1949 Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival, the British Academy Award for Best Film, and an Academy Award for Best Black and White Cinematography in 1950. It was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Film Editing and the Academy Award for Best Director.Copyright: In the United Kingdom, films of this vintage are copyright protected as dramatic works until seventy years after the end of the year in which that last "principal author" died. The principal authors are generally the writer/s, director/s or composer/s of original work, and since in the case of The Third Man Graham Greene died in 1991, the film is protected until the end of 2061. This film lapsed into public domain in the United States when the copyright was not renewed after David Selznick's death, meaning that virtually anyone could duplicate and sell a VHS/DVD copy of the film. Therefore, many of the versions of this film available on the market are either severely (and usually badly) edited and/or of extremely poor quality, having been duped from second- or third-generation (or more) copies of the film. In 1996, the Uruguay Round Agreements Act restored the film's US copyright protection to StudioCanal Image UK Ltd. The Criterion Collection released a digitally restored DVD of the original British print of the film. In 2008, Criterion released a Blu-ray edition, and in September 2010, Lions Gate reissued the film on Blu-ray. On 18 January 2012, the US Supreme Court ruled in Golan v. Holder that the copyright clause of the American Constitution does not prevent the US from meeting its treaty obligations towards copyright protection for foreign works. Following the ruling, notable films such as The Third Man and The 39 Steps were taken back out of the public domain and became fully protected under American copyright law. The Third Man remains under copyright until 1 January 2045.??Bibl.: The New York Times, 23 May 1948. Variety, 24 Aug 1948. Daily Variety, 27 Oct 1948, p. 7. Film Industry, vol. 6, nº 41, 10 Feb 1949, p. 15. Film Industry, vol. 6, nº 42, 24 Feb 1949, p. 17. Monthly Film Bulletin, vol. 16, nº 189, Sep 1949, p. 159. Today's Cinema, vol. 73, nº 5.852, 7 Sep 1949, p. 9. Variety, 7 Sep 49, p. 11. Newsweek, 16 Jan 1950. Daily Variety, 31 Jan 1950. Motion Picture Daily, vol. 67, nº 21, 31 Ene 1950, p.4. Hollywood Reporter, 31 Jan 1950, pp. 3, 6. Film Daily, 1 Feb 50, p. 7. The New York Times, 3 Feb 1950, p. 29. Motion Picture Herald, 4 Feb 50, p. 177. Harrison's Reports, 4 Feb 1950, p. 19.. Box Office, 11 Feb 1950. The Exhibitor, 15 Feb 1950, p. 2.797. Motion Picture Herald, vol. 178, nº 10, 11 Mar 1950. New Yorker, 18 Mar 1950. Variety, 22 Mar 1950. Los Angeles Times, 13 Abr 1950. Hollywood Citizen-News, 13 Abr 1950, p. 21. Variety, 20 Sep 1950. Filmkunst, nº 2, 1950, p. 159. Variety, 14 Oct 1959.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             